so really would be wonderful if all
the code we write was bug-free but the
stark reality of it is that's not the
case when application crashes or behaves
in a way we didn't expect we have to
figure out where the bug occurs in the
application code
fortunately we can use a really powerful
tool to help us called a debugger now
using a debugger we can see what's
happening as the application runs and we
can stop execution at a specific line
of code and examine the state of the
application we can change the values of
variables on the fly and set watch
points to help us understand where we've
gone wrong so in this video we're going
to learn how to use intellij's IDE
debugger just a few caveats before
we begin if you want to see what's
happening inside a class or method then
we have to have the source code for that
class or method now when we are debugging
our own application code of course that's
not a problem but we want to see what's
happening inside a class that belongs
to third-party library and we haven't
got access to the source code and that's
gonna make it a lot harder so in those
cases the best that will be able to do
is examine what values were passed into
a method and what value is returned from
a method so related to that to use the
debugger with a class the compiled class
files must contain debug information and
again when it comes to our application
that's not a problem but third-party
class files don't usually contain debug
information but with that said some
libraries do offer two versions one
without debug information and one with
debug information which of course would
be using the debug version during
development now we're using the debugger
our applications will runs slower than it
usually does because of the extra
processing that has to take place back\
in the debugger and because of that
using a debugger to track down a
threading issue for example can
sometimes be challenging the debugger
can mask threading issues because the
timing of the application isn't the same as
running in debug mode
ok so with those caveats out
of the way let's actually go ahead now
and see the IntelliJ
debugger in action going to go ahead and
create a new class and let's call this
one a debugger demo do as we normally
do when we create a new project so....
....
if you spotted the bug in the code good
though
but if not stay tuned so go back to our main
method now
so now you can hopefully understand that
code that we just put it in their in
main method so we first start creating
an instance of the string utilities
class and then now we also create an
instance of the stringbuilder class then
we are calling the string utilities . add
char method to add a single letter an a
a char to the stringbuilder until the
length of the string builder reaches 10
of course we could use the string
builder . append method directly but
that's what we're doing in the add
char method the method also counts how many
characters it's added to stringbuilder
over the applications run
so it all looks pretty straightforward so let's
actually run the application now when we
do run it you can see that it's now running
it seems to be hanging still
actually running over here we actually
get this error and i'll just move this
down so we can see it easier
we've got an out of memory error so
why has that actually happened
well let's use the debugger to find out
what's going on now running the debugger
inside IntelliJ is actually
very easy instead of actually running up
here this regular a button
that we click when we're running we
click on this little debug icon
looks a little bit like a green lady bug
without the spots we can also where we
would normally run we can click on debug
instead debug main and we can also use
these shortcuts as you can see over to
the right of it so actually click on debug
now and run
you can see that it starts that looks a
little bit different and then it crashes
out so there's a couple of lines that
you saw there about sockets being
printed to the console but otherwise our
application will run as it did before
and when debugging socket is opened
because the debugger attaches to the
application and communicates with the
application using that socket so if we
want to see what's happening inside our
application we need the application to
stop running or suspend at some point so
that we can examine that state then we
tell the debugger where we want the
application to suspend by setting
what's called a breakpoint so the first
step is to decide where we want to set
the breakpoint we can set more than one
let's just start off with a single one
they're taking a look at the code in
the main method here we suspect that
there will be a problem with this call to
the add char method from the string utilities
class so that's where we want to set a
breakpoint because we want to see what
happens when that add char method is
executing so that being the case lets go and
open our string utilities class we're
going to put a breakpoint in this add
char method in the string utilities
class going to place our the place the
cursor on the first line of the add char
method which here in my cases on line
11 we're going to set a breakpoint there
are several ways that we can set a
breakpoint you come over here we can
click on in here this left gutter here i
can click on there and I can click it
and it will toggle on off also go to the
run window and click on toggle on break
point there's also a shortcut here that
we can also use to do the same thing you
can see that on a mac the command for me is
command f8 to set the line a
breakpoint on windows machine would be
control f8 so I can do command f8
on a Mac we can turn the
breakpoint on or off again you can see
that this little red circle appears no
matter which method we use which is our
indication that the breakpoints been set
and again we can toggle that as I showed you by
clicking on the same option that you
selected
to turn the break point on again just
remember that the cursor always
has to be on the line of code though where we
want to set or remove the breakpoint
alright set a celebrate point now on this
first line this line 11 which is the
first line of the add char method so now
we're going to run the debugger again this
time come over here and click on the
little ladybug or debug icon this time
notice we've got a different behavior
than what actually happened last time it
seems to pause the application at a
certain place so basically by setting a
break point when the java runtime
reaches that line of code where we set
the breakpoint the application will
suspend now the Intellij editor as
you can see is highlighting the line of
code where the application is currently
suspended you can see highlighted
in my case in blue and remember that we
can have more than one break point which
is why that's really handy and also down
the bottom here we've noticed that you
can notice a debugger tab is opened in
the same area as the console normally is
this is assuming you're using the
default configuration ui
configuration let's actually come up
here and start with what's in the editor
so when applications suspends at a
breakpoint keep in mind that the line of
code has not been executed yet in this
case we entered the method the add
char method but with pause before the
string the this . s builder appened line
method has been called this is actually
quite an important point to remember
breakpoints cause the application to
suspend before the line of code has been
executed but it isn't always the case
that when the application suspends the
highlighted line of code hasn't been executed
yet it will actually depend on the
context for break points though it has
not been executed as we mentioned and
we'll see an example of when it has been
executed a little bit later but notice
now that the red circle contains what
looks maybe like a little check mark so its
changed from what was just a red circle
without anything in the middle to a
little like check or a tick or something
along those lines and that's actually
indicating that the debugger is live and
over here to the right of the actual
line that its processing see in my case
in yellow we can see what it says
s builder Colon and 2 double quotes then
we've got to c colon than the a like
an a char and then a number 97
so what this is doing is telling us the
current values of the parameters we
passed to this method now the S builder
variable is empty and the c
variable contains the value a in double
quotes and incidentally the ascii code
for a is 97 so that's what that 97 for
now these at the moment are the expected
values that should be occurring
when we made the call to that
method and since this is the first
iteration of the while loop in the main
method the string builder is empty and
again we pass a as the second parameter
let's look down here in the debug tab
there's two sections that you can see
these frames over here and then there's
also variables now the frame section
over here to the left shows the
execution stack trace so each time a
method is called a frame is added to
that stack trace now in this case there
are two frames on the stack the first
method call is at the bottom line here
which is the main method which was
called by the java runtime the main
method called the add char method from
our string utilities class and that's
this next frame which is currently
highlighted in blue that's also the top
frame which means that it's the method
that's currently executing now the
drop-down here above these stack trace
shows all the threads are executing and
their states and to see that stack trace
for another thread we just have to
select from the drop-down this can be
useful when you're trying to debug a
multi-threaded application even more
conveniently we can even a even have
threads pane to the frame area by
pressing the restore thread view button
and that's located here to the right
of the pane the bottom panes
toolbar and click on this that gives us
another little pane their
threads which is again very useful when
you're debugging threaded applications
and you can just click on this little
arrow here to close at any time you come
back over and opened it any time you
want to now in terms of this drop-down
once we click that we can actually use
the up and down arrows to move through
the stack trace which is an interesting
idea so move up and down here
but then we can also here this in the
actual stack trace we can also use our
arrows to go up and down as well and you
can see as i'm doing that the actual
editor is changing to the context that's
relevant for that particular method so
the first case down the bottom there is
our main method you can see a light blue
highlight background
color for line 9 telling us that was the
line that was being called and if I move the
down arrow the up arrow I should say
we get to the add char method that's in
a more striking blue
background telling us that is the
current currently executing line or the
line that is to be executed when we
continue and notice also here to the
right that as i'm selecting those again I can
use arrows or click the actual
variables update to show the values of
all the live variables available to that
selected frame shows instance variables
the method parameters and also any local
variables that have been declared before
the suspension point they can see there
that we're getting different values
there in this case with the
main method or the mainframe it would
be probably more correct to be calling
it that you can see at this point we've
got the variables that are relevant and
available for the main method we click
back again to the add char method you
see that variables the chars added
method knows about which includes the
instance or fields instance variables
or fields for the string utilities
class so actually see those instance
variables for a particular class if
there are any we have to expand that
this item open up and you can see
that we've gotten a list of the
instance variables for this particular
class so you can see the s builder
instance variable there now since
it's an instance of the stringbuilder
class we can actually expand that
further by opening here and actually
seeing the values so actually seeing
now the instance variables that belonged
to the stringbuilder itself and we can
see here in this
stringbuilder dot value variable is a
char 16 or a right over here and all its
elements are currently 0 you might
expand that to out to see that you can see at the
moment we've got nothing in there
which is consistent with the fact that
hasn't been used at this point in time
and also i just put that back again the
count variable again this is for the
stringbuilder class itself is also set
to 0 but again that's because we haven't
add anything to it and that would make sense
notice also that the chars added is
shown under this but it's also shown on
its own line further down so it's shown
outside of this as a convenience because
it's used in the method in which we
currently suspended now if for instance
variables were used within the method
that also appear here as well we'll see
later that we can also use watches to
make seeing some values more convenient
now below the this close it off for now
we can also see the two parameters that
were added to the add char method or part
of the add char method now intellij marks
parameters with a p as you can see here
to indicate that they're actually
parameters
it's like an orange circle with a p in
there now one of the principal one of
the parameters has the same name as the
instance variable and this point if we
open that up you might actually get more
of a clue into the bug if you haven't
already
let's just pretend that we haven't had
our morning coffee or tea and that we're
not cluing into anything just yet
and just finally before finish this
video is also after these parameters
these two items marked with glasses now
these are watches that intellij
automatically sets but we'll get back to
those later ignore those for now the
point is that right now the variables
all have the values that we expect now
both the instant stringbuilder and the
one we passed as a parameter have a
length of 0 and the parameter check
character is a if you haven't figured
out the bug at this point we probably
want to see what happens when we run the
line of code that appends the character to
the stringbuilder so we want to take a
look at the values of the variables after
the append has taken place so we want the
application to suspend again after
executing that one line that append now
I guess we could set a breakpoint
on that next line and that would work in
this case but you can imagine that
you're debugging a long method and
wanted to suspend execution after every
line in other words we want to step
through the method having to set a
breakpoint every line would quickly
become tedious
unfortunately the debugger providers
ways or other ways to control the execution
of our application and in the next video
will start going through looking at
these and actually figured out what some
of these buttons up here are here in the
debug pane and putting them to use so see
you in the next video